README.md, before:

# Constrain

`Constrain` allows you to check if an object match a class expression. It is
typically used to check the type of method parameters and is an alternative to
using Ruby-3 .rbs files but with a different syntax and only dynamic checks

```ruby
include Constrain

# f takes a String and an array of Integer objects and raises otherwise
def f(a, b)
  constrain a, String
  constrain b, [Integer]
  ...
end

f("Hello", [1, 2])    # Doesn't raise
f("Hello", "world")   # Boom
```

It is intended to be an aid in development only and to be deactivated in
production (TODO: Make it possible to deactivate)

Constrain works with ruby-2 (and maybe ruby-3)

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'constrain'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle install

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install constrain

## Usage

You will typically include Constrain globally to have #constrain available everywhere

```ruby
require 'constrain'

# Include globally to make #constrain available everywhere
include Constrain

def f(a, b, c)
  constrain a, Integer                      # An integer
  constrain b, [Symbol, String] => Integer  # Hash with String or Symbol keys
  constrain c, [String], NilClass           # Array of strings or nil
  ...
end
```

The alternative is to include the constrain Module in a common root class to
have it available in all child class

## Methods

#### constrain(value, \*class-expressions, message = nil, unwind: 0)

Check that the value matches at least one of the class-expressions and
raise a Constrain::TypeError if not. The error message can be customized by
added the message argument and a number of backtrace leves can be skipped by
setting :unwind option. By default the backtrace will refer to the call of #constrain
\#constrain also raises a Constrain::Error exception if there is an error
in the syntax of the class expression

\#constrain is typically used to type-check parameters in methods where you
want an exception if the parameters doesn't match the expected


#### Constrain.check(value, \*class-expression) -> true or false

It matches value against the class expressions like #constrain but returns true
or false as result and can be used to handle complex type expressions dynamically 

## Class Expressions

Constrain#constrain and Constrain::check use class expressions composed of
class or module objects, Proc objects, or arrays and hashes of class expressions. Class or module
objects match if `value.is_a?(class_or_module)` returns true:

```ruby
constrain 42, Integer         # Success
constrain 42, Comparable      # Success
constrain nil, Comparable     # Failure
```

More than one class expression is allowed. It matches if at least one of the expressions match:

```ruby
constrain "str", Symbol, String   # Success
constrain :sym, Symbol, String    # Success
constrain 42, Symbol, String      # Failure
```

#### nil, true and false

NilClass is a valid argument and can be used to allow nil values:

```ruby
constrain nil, Integer             # Failure
constrain nil, Integer, NilClass   # Success
```

Boolean values are a special case since ruby doesn't have a boolean type use a
list to match for a boolean argument:

```ruby
constrain true, TrueClass, FalseClass   # Success
constrain false, TrueClass, FalseClass  # Success
constrain nil, TrueClass, FalseClass    # Failure
```

#### Proc objects

Proc objects are called with the value as argument and should return truish or falsy:

```ruby
constrain 42, lambda { |value| value > 1 }    # Success
constrain 0, lambda { |value| value > 1 }     # Failure
```

Note that it is not possible to first match against a class expression and then use the proc object. You will either have to check for the type too in the proc object or make two calls to #constrain:

```ruby
constrain 0, Integer                          # Success
constrain 0, lambda { |value| value > 1 }     # Failure
```

Proc objects can check every aspect of an object but you should not overuse it
because as checks becomes more complex they tend to include business logic that
should be kept in the production code. Constrain is only thouhgt of as a tool
to catch developer errors - not errors that stem from corrupted data

#### Arrays

Arrays match if the value is an Array and all its element match the given class expression:

```ruby
constrain [42], [Integer]   # Success
constrain [42], [String]    # Failure
```

Arrays can be nested

```ruby
constrain [[42]], [[Integer]]   # Success
constrain [42], [[Integer]]     # Failure
```

More than one element class is allowed

```ruby
constrain ["str"], [String, Symbol]   # Success
constrain [:sym], [String, Symbol]    # Success
constrain [42], [String, Symbol]      # Failure
```

Note that `[` ... `]` is treated specially in hashes

#### Hashes

Hashes match if value is a hash and every key/value pair match one of the given
key-class/value-class expressions:

```ruby
constrain({"str" => 42}, String => Integer)   # Success
constrain({"str" => 42}, String => String)    # Failure
```

Note that the parenthesis are needed because otherwise the Ruby parser would
interpret the hash as block argument to #constrain

Hash keys or values can also be lists of class expressions that match if any
expression match. List are annotated as an array but contains more than one
element so that `[String, Symbol]` matches either a String or a Symbol value
while `[String]` matches an array of String objects:

```ruby
constrain({ sym: 42 }, [Symbol, String] => Integer)       # Success
constrain({ [sym] => 42 }, [Symbol, String] => Integer)   # Failure
```

To specify an array of Symbol or String objects in hash keys or values, make
sure the list expression is enclosed in an array:

```ruby
constrain({ [sym] => 42 }, [[Symbol, String]] => Integer)   # Success
```

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/clrgit/constrain.

Commit message:

Renamed Constrain::check to Constrain::constrain?

README.md, after:

# Constrain

`Constrain` allows you to check if an object match a class expression. It is
typically used to check the type of method parameters and is an alternative to
using Ruby-3 .rbs files but with a different syntax and only dynamic checks

```ruby
include Constrain

# f takes a String and an array of Integer objects and raises otherwise
def f(a, b)
  constrain a, String
  constrain b, [Integer]
  ...
end

f("Hello", [1, 2])    # Doesn't raise
f("Hello", "world")   # Boom
```

It is intended to be an aid in development only and to be deactivated in
production (TODO: Make it possible to deactivate)

Constrain works with ruby-2 (and maybe ruby-3)

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'constrain'
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle install

Or install it yourself as:

    $ gem install constrain

## Usage

You will typically include Constrain globally to have #constrain available everywhere

```ruby
require 'constrain'

# Include globally to make #constrain available everywhere
include Constrain

def f(a, b, c)
  constrain a, Integer                      # An integer
  constrain b, [Symbol, String] => Integer  # Hash with String or Symbol keys
  constrain c, [String], NilClass           # Array of strings or nil
  ...
end
```

The alternative is to include the constrain Module in a common root class to
have it available in all child class

## Methods

#### constrain(value, \*class-expressions, message = nil, unwind: 0)

Check that the value matches at least one of the class-expressions and
raise a Constrain::TypeError if not. The error message can be customized by
added the message argument and a number of backtrace leves can be skipped by
setting :unwind option. By default the backtrace will refer to the call of #constrain
\#constrain also raises a Constrain::Error exception if there is an error
in the syntax of the class expression

\#constrain is typically used to type-check parameters in methods where you
want an exception if the parameters doesn't match the expected


#### Constrain.constrain?(value, \*class-expression) -> true or false

It matches value against the class expressions like #constrain but returns true
or false as result and can be used to handle complex type expressions
dynamically. It is made a class method to minimize namespace pollution


## Class Expressions

Constrain#constrain and Constrain::constrain? use class expressions composed of
class or module objects, Proc objects, or arrays and hashes of class expressions. Class or module
objects match if `value.is_a?(class_or_module)` returns true:

```ruby
constrain 42, Integer         # Success
constrain 42, Comparable      # Success
constrain nil, Comparable     # Failure
```

More than one class expression is allowed. It matches if at least one of the expressions match:

```ruby
constrain "str", Symbol, String   # Success
constrain :sym, Symbol, String    # Success
constrain 42, Symbol, String      # Failure
```

#### nil, true and false

NilClass is a valid argument and can be used to allow nil values:

```ruby
constrain nil, Integer             # Failure
constrain nil, Integer, NilClass   # Success
```

Boolean values are a special case since ruby doesn't have a boolean type use a
list to match for a boolean argument:

```ruby
constrain true, TrueClass, FalseClass   # Success
constrain false, TrueClass, FalseClass  # Success
constrain nil, TrueClass, FalseClass    # Failure
```

#### Proc objects

Proc objects are called with the value as argument and should return truish or falsy:

```ruby
constrain 42, lambda { |value| value > 1 }    # Success
constrain 0, lambda { |value| value > 1 }     # Failure
```

Note that it is not possible to first match against a class expression and then use the proc object. You will either have to check for the type too in the proc object or make two calls to #constrain:

```ruby
constrain 0, Integer                          # Success
constrain 0, lambda { |value| value > 1 }     # Failure
```

Proc objects can check every aspect of an object but you should not overuse it
because as checks becomes more complex they tend to include business logic that
should be kept in the production code. Constrain is only thouhgt of as a tool
to catch developer errors - not errors that stem from corrupted data

#### Arrays

Arrays match if the value is an Array and all its element match the given class expression:

```ruby
constrain [42], [Integer]   # Success
constrain [42], [String]    # Failure
```

Arrays can be nested

```ruby
constrain [[42]], [[Integer]]   # Success
constrain [42], [[Integer]]     # Failure
```

More than one element class is allowed

```ruby
constrain ["str"], [String, Symbol]   # Success
constrain [:sym], [String, Symbol]    # Success
constrain [42], [String, Symbol]      # Failure
```

Note that `[` ... `]` is treated specially in hashes

#### Hashes

Hashes match if value is a hash and every key/value pair match one of the given
key-class/value-class expressions:

```ruby
constrain({"str" => 42}, String => Integer)   # Success
constrain({"str" => 42}, String => String)    # Failure
```

Note that the parenthesis are needed because otherwise the Ruby parser would
interpret the hash as block argument to #constrain

Hash keys or values can also be lists of class expressions that match if any
expression match. List are annotated as an array but contains more than one
element so that `[String, Symbol]` matches either a String or a Symbol value
while `[String]` matches an array of String objects:

```ruby
constrain({ sym: 42 }, [Symbol, String] => Integer)       # Success
constrain({ [sym] => 42 }, [Symbol, String] => Integer)   # Failure
```

To specify an array of Symbol or String objects in hash keys or values, make
sure the list expression is enclosed in an array:

```ruby
constrain({ [sym] => 42 }, [[Symbol, String]] => Integer)   # Success
```

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/clrgit/constrain.
